crates/api/README.md, before:

# anon_ticket_api

The HTTP REST gateway for the anon-ticket system. It provides endpoints for users to redeem payments for tokens and for admins to manage the system.

## 🚀 Features

- **Dual-Listener (Mandatory)**: Public listener serves users; an internal listener is required for metrics/admin, enforcing network isolation.
- **Unix Socket Support**: Native support for binding to Unix Domain Sockets, ideal for secure IPC with Nginx or Tor.
- **Atomic Redemption**: Guarantees no double-spending of Payment IDs.
- **DoS Protection**: Bloom + positive cache only (no negative cache) to reject unknown PIDs early without polluting the filter.

## 🛠️ Configuration

Configured via environment variables.

### Public Interface
| Variable | Description | Default |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `API_BIND_ADDRESS` | TCP address for public traffic (e.g. `0.0.0.0:8080`). | `127.0.0.1:8080` |
| `API_UNIX_SOCKET` | Path to Unix socket (overrides TCP if set). | `None` |

### Internal Interface
| Variable | Description | Default |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `API_INTERNAL_BIND_ADDRESS` | TCP address for admin/metrics (e.g. `127.0.0.1:9090`). | `None` (Required if no UDS) |
| `API_INTERNAL_UNIX_SOCKET` | Path to internal Unix socket. | `None` (Required if no TCP) |

### Dependencies
| Variable | Description | Required |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `DATABASE_URL` | Connection string for SQLite/Postgres. | Yes |

### PID Cache Tuning
| Variable | Description | Default |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `API_PID_CACHE_TTL_SECS` | TTL (in seconds) for positive PID cache entries. | `60` |
| `API_PID_CACHE_CAPACITY` | Max entries in the positive cache. | `100000` |
| `API_PID_BLOOM_ENTRIES` | Expected PID cardinality for the Bloom filter. | `100000` |
| `API_PID_BLOOM_FP_RATE` | False-positive rate for the Bloom filter (0-1). | `0.01` |
| `API_ALLOW_NO_BLOOM` | Dev-only escape hatch to run without a Bloom filter (not recommended). | `None` |

## 📚 API Reference

### Public Endpoints

#### `POST /api/v1/redeem`
Exchanges a Payment ID for a Service Token.
- **Body**: `{ "pid": "16_char_hex_string" }`
- **Response**: `{ "status": "success", "service_token": "...", "balance": 1000 }`

#### `GET /api/v1/token/{token}`
Checks the status of a Service Token.
- **Response**: `{ "status": "active|revoked", "amount": 1000, ... }`

### Internal Endpoints

#### `GET /metrics`
Prometheus metrics exposition.

#### `POST /api/v1/token/{token}/revoke`
**Admin Only**. Revokes a token immediately.
- **Body**: `{ "reason": "abuse", "abuse_score": 100 }`
- **Response**: `{ "status": "revoked", ... }`

## 📦 Usage

```bash
# Run locally with both ports open
export DATABASE_URL=sqlite://ticket.db
export API_BIND_ADDRESS=127.0.0.1:8080
export API_INTERNAL_BIND_ADDRESS=127.0.0.1:9090

cargo run -p anon_ticket_api
```

Commit message:

feat(api): enum token status and harden pid defenses

crates/api/README.md, after:

# anon_ticket_api

The HTTP REST gateway for the anon-ticket system. It provides endpoints for users to redeem payments for tokens and for admins to manage the system.

## 🚀 Features

- **Dual-Listener (Mandatory)**: Public listener serves users; an internal listener is required for metrics/admin, enforcing network isolation.
- **Unix Socket Support**: Native support for binding to Unix Domain Sockets, ideal for secure IPC with Nginx or Tor.
- **Atomic Redemption**: Guarantees no double-spending of Payment IDs.
- **DoS Protection**: Bloom + positive cache only (no negative cache) to reject unknown PIDs early without polluting the filter.

## 🛠️ Configuration

Configured via environment variables.

### Public Interface
| Variable | Description | Default |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `API_BIND_ADDRESS` | TCP address for public traffic (e.g. `0.0.0.0:8080`). | `127.0.0.1:8080` |
| `API_UNIX_SOCKET` | Path to Unix socket (overrides TCP if set). | `None` |

### Internal Interface
| Variable | Description | Default |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `API_INTERNAL_BIND_ADDRESS` | TCP address for admin/metrics (e.g. `127.0.0.1:9090`). | `None` (Required if no UDS) |
| `API_INTERNAL_UNIX_SOCKET` | Path to internal Unix socket. | `None` (Required if no TCP) |

### Dependencies
| Variable | Description | Required |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `DATABASE_URL` | Connection string for SQLite/Postgres. | Yes |

### PID Cache Tuning
| Variable | Description | Default |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `API_PID_CACHE_TTL_SECS` | TTL (in seconds) for positive PID cache entries. | `60` |
| `API_PID_CACHE_CAPACITY` | Max entries in the positive cache. | `100000` |
| `API_PID_BLOOM_ENTRIES` | Expected PID cardinality for the Bloom filter. | `100000` |
| `API_PID_BLOOM_FP_RATE` | False-positive rate for the Bloom filter (0-1). | `0.01` |
| `API_ALLOW_NO_BLOOM` | Dev-only escape hatch to run without a Bloom filter (not recommended). | `None` |

Bloom sizing cheat-sheet (memory per Bloom): `n=1e6,p=1e-4` → ~2.4 MB (k≈14);
`n=1e6,p=1e-6` → ~3.6 MB (k≈20); `n=1e7,p=1e-4` → ~24 MB. Monitor
`api_redeem_bloom_db_miss_total` to catch FPR drift; prefer increasing entries
over rebuilds (correctness already preserved by DB lookups).

## 📚 API Reference

### Public Endpoints

#### `POST /api/v1/redeem`
Exchanges a Payment ID for a Service Token.
- **Body**: `{ "pid": "16_char_hex_string" }`
- **Response**: `{ "status": "success", "service_token": "...", "balance": 1000 }`

#### `GET /api/v1/token/{token}`
Checks the status of a Service Token.
- **Response**: `{ "status": "active|revoked", "amount": 1000, ... }`
  - `status` is an enum serialized as `active` or `revoked`.

### Internal Endpoints

#### `GET /metrics`
Prometheus metrics exposition.

#### `POST /api/v1/token/{token}/revoke`
**Admin Only**. Revokes a token immediately.
- **Body**: `{ "reason": "abuse", "abuse_score": 100 }`
- **Response**: `{ "status": "revoked", ... }`
- Idempotent: revoking an already-revoked token returns 200 with its current state.

## 📦 Usage

```bash
# Run locally with both ports open
export DATABASE_URL=sqlite://ticket.db
export API_BIND_ADDRESS=127.0.0.1:8080
export API_INTERNAL_BIND_ADDRESS=127.0.0.1:9090

cargo run -p anon_ticket_api
```
